# Varanasi



## Kashi Vishwanath Temple

"Kashi Vishwanath" redirects here. For other uses, see Kashi Vishwanath (disambiguation). Not to be confused with Shri Vishwanath Temple, BHU. For other uses, see Kashi Vishwanath Temple (disambiguation).

Kashi Vishwanath Temple is a Hindu temple dedicated to Shiva. It is located in Vishwanath Gali, in Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh, India. The temple is a Hindu pilgrimage site and is one of the twelve Jyotirlinga shrines. The presiding deity is known by the names Vishwanath and Vishweshwara (IAST: Viśvanātha and Viśveśvara), meaning Lord of the Universe.

The original temple, called the Adi Vishveshwar Temple, was demolished by Mohammad of Ghor during his invasion of India. Subsequently, the template was rebuilt by Man Singh I and Todar Mal under the emperor Akbar. According to several historical accounts, the Mughal Emperor Aurangzeb ordered the demolition of the Hindu temple in 1669.[1] Subsequently, in 1678, the Gyanvapi Mosque was built on its site,[2] but Hindu pilgrims continued to visit the remnants of the temple.[1] The current structure was constructed on an adjacent site by the Maratha ruler Ahilyabai Holkar of Indore in 1780.[3]

In 2021, a major redevelopment of the temple complex was completed, and the Kashi Vishwanath Dham Corridor connecting the Ganga river with the temple was inaugurated by Prime Minister Modi, leading to a many-fold increase in visitors.[4][5] It has become one of the most visited Hindu temples in India, with an average 45,000 pilgrims per day in 2023.[6] The total assets of the temple, were estimated to be more than ₹6 crores in 2024.[7]

Legend
It is believed that Varanasi is the first Jyotirlinga to manifest itself.[8] According to the legend, it was at this place that Shiva (the Hindu god of destruction) manifested as an infinite column of light (Jyotirlinga) in front of Brahma (the Hindu god of creation) and Vishnu (the Hindu god of preservation) when they had an argument about their supremacy.[9]

In order to discover the origin of the luminous column, Vishnu took the form of a boar (Varaha) and tracked the column beneath the ground, while Brahma, who assumed the shape of a swan, scoured the heavens in an attempt to locate the apex of the column. However, both of them were unsuccessful in identifying the source of the luminous column. Yet, Brahma deceitfully asserted that he had discovered the summit of the column, while Vishnu humbly admitted his inability to find the starting point of the radiant column. Due to Brahma's deceit over the discovery of the origin of the luminous column, Shiva penalised him by cutting his fifth head and placing a curse upon him. This curse entailed that Brahma would no longer receive reverence, whereas Vishnu, being truthful, would be equally venerated alongside Shiva and have dedicated temples for eternity.[10][11]

Hindu scriptures describe Vishweshwara as the sacred deity of Varanasi, holding the position of king over all the other deities as well as over all the inhabitants of the city and the extended circuit of the Panchkoshi, an area (the sacred boundary of Varanasi) spreading over 50 miles.[12]

Jyotirlinga
The jyotirlinga is an ancient axis mundi symbol representing the supremely formless (nirguna) reality at the core of creation, out of which the form (saguna) of Shiva appears. The jyothirlinga shrines are thus places where Shiva appeared as a fiery column of light.[13][14]

There are twelve 'self manifested' jyotirlinga sites that take the name of the presiding deity; each is considered a different manifestation of Shiva.[15] At all these sites, the primary image is a lingam representing the beginningless and endless Stambha pillar, symbolising the infinite nature of Shiva.[15][16][17]

The twelve jyothirlinga are located at Somnath in Gujarat, Mallikarjuna at Srisailam in Andhra Pradesh, Mahakaleswar at Ujjain in Madhya Pradesh, Omkareshwar in Madhya Pradesh, Kedarnath in Uttarakhand, Bhimashankar in Maharashtra, Viswanath at Varanasi in Uttar Pradesh, Triambakeshwar in Maharashtra, Baidyanath Jyotirlinga at Deoghar in Jharkhand, Nageswar at Dwarka in Gujarat, Rameshwar at Rameswaram in Tamil Nadu, and Grishneshwar at Aurangabad in Maharashtra.[9][18]

History
Ancient and classical periods
The Skanda Purana contains a part titled "Kashi Khanda", while the Brahmavaivarta Purana includes a portion known as "Kashi Rahasya", both of which are dedicated to the city of Varanasi.[19]

As per the Kashi Khanda, there were a total of 1099 temples, out of which 513 were specifically devoted to the worship of Shiva. The scripture states that the Vishvanath temple was formerly known as Moksha Lakshmi Vilas. The temple housed a total of five mandapas (halls). The lingam of Vishwanath was situated in the garbhagriha (innermost sanctuary). The remaining four mandapas include the Jnana mandapa located to the east, the Ranga mandapa to the west, the Aishvarya mandapa to the north, and the Mukti mandapa to the south.[19]

Nārāyaṇa Bhaṭṭa, in his book Tristhalisetu,[20] as well as Madhuri Desai describe that the temple centres around a repetition of destruction and reconstruction.[21]

Medieval period and destruction
Main article: Razia Mosque
The original Vishwanath temple, initially known as the Adi Vishveshwar Temple, was destroyed by the Ghurids in 1194, when Mu'izz al-Din Muhammad ibn Sam returned to India and defeated Jayachandra of Kannauj near Chandawar and afterwards razed the city of Kashi.[22] In a few years[year needed], the Razia Mosque was constructed in its place.[23][24][25] In 1230, the temple was rebuilt near the Avimukteshwara Temple, away from the main site, during the reign of Delhi's Sultan Iltutmish (1211–1266).[26] It was demolished again during the rule of either Hussain Shah Sharqi (1447–1458) or Sikandar Lodi (1489–1517).[citation needed]

Mughal period
Sketches by James Prinsep[27]

The Gyanvapi Mosque sketched as the Temple of Vishveshwur, Benares.

Plan of the Ancient Temple of Vishveshwar.
The dotted line shows the portion of the temple occupied by the present Masjid.
Main article: Gyanvapi Mosque
Raja Man Singh started rebuilding the temple during Akbar's reign.[24][28] Raja Todar Mal furthered the reconstruction of the temple in 1585.[29]

In the seventeenth century, during the rule of Jahangir, Vir Singh Deo completed the construction of the earlier temple.[30] In 1669, Mughal Emperor Aurangzeb destroyed the temple and built the Gyanvapi Mosque in its place.[31][32] The remains of the erstwhile temple can be seen in the foundation, the columns, and the rear part of the mosque.[33]

Maratha and British period

Elevation of the present temple structure
In 1742, the Maratha ruler Malhar Rao Holkar devised a plan to demolish the mosque and reconstruct the Vishweshwar temple at the site. However, his plan did not materialise, partly because of the intervention of the Nawab of Awadh, who was given control of the territory.[34]: 2  In 1750, the Maharaja of Jaipur commissioned a survey of the land around the site with the objective of purchasing land to rebuild the Kashi Vishwanath temple, which in turn failed.[34]: 85 

In 1785, at the behest of Governor General Warren Hastings, Collector Mohammed Ibrahim constructed a Naubatkhana in front of the temple.[35] In 1780, Malhar Rao's daughter-in-law, Ahilyabai Holkar, built the present temple adjacent to the mosque.[36] In 1828, Baiza Bai, widow of the Maratha ruler Daulat Rao Scindhia of Gwalior State, built a low-roofed colonnade with over 40 pillars in the Gyan Vapi precinct.[37] During 1833–1840, at the boundary of Gyanvapi Well, the ghats (steps by the riverside) and other nearby temples[which?] were constructed.

Many noble families from various ancestral kingdoms of the Indian subcontinent, and their predecessor states, made generous contributions to the operation of the temple.[38] In 1835, Maharaja Ranjit Singh of the Sikh Empire, at the behest of his wife, Maharani Datar Kaur, donated 1 tonne of gold for plating the temple's dome. In 1841, Raghuji Bhonsle III of Nagpur donated silver to the temple.[34]: 200 [39]

The temple was managed by a hereditary group of pandits or mahants. After the death of Mahant Devi Dutt, a dispute arose among his successors. In 1900, his brother-in-law, Pandit Visheshwar Dayal Tewari, filed a lawsuit, which resulted in him being declared the head priest.[40]

Post-Independence
Since 1983, the temple has been managed by a board of trustees set up by the government of Uttar Pradesh.[41] The Puja of the Maa Shringar Gauri Temple, on the western side of the disputed Gyanvapi Mosque, was restricted after the demolition of the Babri Masjid in December 1992, due to the ensuing deadly riots that followed the demolition of the mosque. In August 2021, five Hindu women petitioned a local court in Varanasi to be allowed to pray at the Maa Shringar Gauri Temple.[42]


Prime Minister Narendra Modi speaking at the inauguration of the renovated Kashi Vishwanath Corridor on 13 December 2021.
After 239 years, the Kumbhabhishekham (consecration ceremony) of the temple was held on 5 July 2018, which was conducted by Nattukottai Nagarathar, a mercantile community of Tamil Nadu.[43]

The Kashi Vishwanath Corridor Project was launched by Prime Minister Narendra Modi in 2019 to make it easier to travel between the temple and the Ganges River and to create more space to prevent crowding. On 13 December 2021, Modi inaugurated the corridor with a sacred ceremony.[44] A press release by the government said that around 1,400 residents and businesses within the corridor's area were relocated elsewhere and compensated. It also said that more than 40 ruined, centuries-old temples were found and rebuilt, including the Gangeshwar Mahadev temple, the Manokameshwar Mahadev temple, the Jauvinayak temple, and the Shri Kumbha Mahadev temple.[45][46]

In February 2022, the sanctum sanctorum of the temple was gold-plated after an anonymous donor from South India donated 60 kg of gold to the temple.[47] Flowers from the temple are recycled into incense by the biomaterials startup Phool.co.[48]

As of August 2023, the Kashi Vishwanath Temple Trust reported that 10 crore (100 million) tourists had visited the temple since the inauguration of the corridor in December 2021.[49]

Temple complex

The original holy well—Gyanvapi is in between the temple and Gyanvapi Mosque

Ganga Dwara, Gateway of Corridor that connects Kashi Vishwanath Temple with Ghats of the Ganges.

Checking point at Kashi Vishwanath annapurna Entrance
The temple complex consists of a series of smaller shrines located in a small lane called the Vishwanatha Gali, near the river. The linga of the main deity at the shrine is 60 centimetres (24 in) tall and 90 centimetres (35 in) in circumference, housed in a silver altar.[50] The main temple is a quadrangle, and there are shrines to other gods all around it. There are small temples for Kala Bhairava, Kartikeya, Avimukteshwara, Vishnu, Ganesha, Shani, Shiva, and Parvati in the complex.

There is a small well in the temple called the Jnana Vapi, also spelled Gyan Vapi (the wisdom well). The Jnana Vapi is located to the north of the main temple, and during the invasion by the Mughals, the jyotirlinga was hidden in the well to protect it. It is said that the main priest of the temple jumped in the well with the lingam in order to protect the jyotirlinga from invaders.

There is a Sabha Griha (congregation hall) leading to the inner Garbha Griha (sanctum sanctorum). The jyotirlinga is enshrined in the sanctuary and placed on a silver platform. The structure of the temple is composed of three parts. The first consists of a 15.5-meter-high spire on the temple; the second is a gold dome; and the third is the gold spire within the sanctuary bearing a flag and a trident.

The Kashi Vishwanath Temple is popularly known as the Golden Temple, due to the gold plating of its spire. One tonne of gold donated by Maharaja Ranjit Singh has been used in the gold plating,[51] as well as in three domes, each made up of pure gold, donated in 1835.

The temple receives around 3,000 visitors every day. On certain occasions, the numbers reach 1,000,000 or more.

The Shri Kashi Vishwanath Dham corridor was constructed between Kashi Vishwanath Temple and Manikarnika Ghat along the Ganges River, providing various amenities for pilgrims.[52]

Religious importance
Located on the banks of the holy river Ganges, Varanasi is regarded as among the holiest of the Hindu cities. The Kashi Vishwanath Temple is widely recognised as one of the most important places of worship in the Hindu religion, because the it holds the jyotirlinga of Shiva Vishveshwara, or Vishvanath.

A visit to the temple and a bath in the Ganges is one of many methods believed to lead one on a path to moksha (liberation). Thus, Hindus from all over the world try to visit the place at least once in their lifetime. There is also a tradition that one should give up at least one desire after a pilgrimage to the temple, and the pilgrimage would also include a visit to the temple at Rameswaram in Tamil Nadu in South India, to which people take water samples of the Ganges to perform prayer there and bring back sand from near that temple.

Because of the immense popularity and holiness of Kashi Vishwanath Temple, hundreds of temples across India have been built in the same architectural style. Many legends tell of the true devotee achieving freedom from death and saṃsāra (aimlessness) by the worship of Shiva, Shiva's devotees upon death being directly taken to his abode on Mount Kailash by his messengers and not to judgement by Yama.[citation needed] There is a popular belief that Shiva himself blows the mantra of salvation into the ears of people who die naturally at the Vishwanath temple.[53]

It is one of the shrines of the Vaippu Sthalams sung by Tamil Saivite Nayanar Sambandar.[54][55][56]

Festivals
Phalgun Shukla Ekadashi is celebrated as Rangabhari Ekadashi, that is, a festival of colours. According to tradition, before Holi, Baba Vishwanath comes back to Kashi after having a cow in the form of Mother Bhagwati. The temple complex echoes with the beating of dozens of damroos (two-sided drums). This tradition has been performed for over 200 years. On Vasant Panchami, Baba's Tilak is performed. There is Shivaratri's marriage, and Rangbhari Ekadashi marks Parvati leaving with her husband Shiva.[57] These traditions have been carried out by the erstwhile Mahant family of the temple for over a century.[58]

These rituals of Baba's marriage ceremony are performed at the residence of Kulpati Tiwari, the erstwhile Mahant of Shri Kashi Vishwanath Temple in Redzone.[59] The seven rituals of Saptarishi Aarti were performed by Baba Vishwanath. According to the Puranas, Kashi is beloved by the Saptarishi; so, according to the tradition, the devotees of the Saptarishi Aarti perform the rituals of marriage. The seven archaks under the leadership of Pradhan Archak Pandit Shashibhushan Tripathi (Guddu Maharaj) completed the marriage in Vedic rituals.[60] Mangala Aarti is performed at 3:30 am, Bhog Aarti at 12:00 pm, Saptarishi Aarti at 7:30 pm and Shringar Aarti at 11:00 pm.[61]

The Yadav community of Kashi associated with Chandravanshi Gop Seva Samiti and Shree Krishna Yadav Mahasabha have been performing jalabhishek on a shivling, traditionally for 90 years, starting in 1932.[62]

Transport and accommodations
There are transportation options for getting to Benaras by air, land, and water. Lal Bahadur Shastri International Airport is located roughly 22 kilometres from the city centre and approximately 25 km from the temple complex. There are two railway stations in the city, namely Varanasi Cantonment Station and Kashi Railway Station.

The city has two bus terminals: one located at the Cantonment (Cantt) and another at Golgadda, commonly referred to as Kashi Depot. The Cantonment terminal manages buses for both depots. The urban transportation system comprises many types of vehicles, including two-wheelers (34%), autos (20%), cycles (16%), pedestrians (14%), four-wheelers (6%), cycle rickshaws (6%), and other miscellaneous vehicles (4%).[63]

There are various dharmshalas, rented guest rooms, and other hotels and lodges available nearby at various prices, including a guest house run by the Shri Kashi Vishwanath Temple Trust.[64]



## List of Hindu temples in Varanasi

Varanasi is an ancient city in India famous for housing many Hindu temples. The city's ancient holiness makes it a sacred geography in Hinduism. The city's temples were erected at different times throughout the history of Varanasi by various kings, saints, monasteries, guilds and communities. The city is one of the largest collection of historic and newly built Hindu temples. Varanasi is an ancient city with deep spiritual roots and significance for the Hindus and it reflects this heritage in over a thousand temples.

Varanasi, also known as Benares,[1] Banaras (Banāras), or Kashi (Kāśī), is the holiest of the seven sacred cities (Sapta Puri) in Hinduism and Jainism, and played an important role in the development of Buddhism. It is one of the oldest continuously inhabited cities in the world. Varanasi is also known as the favourite city of the Hindu deity Shiva.[2][3]

No significant elements of temple buildings predating the Muslim conquest remain, though many temples have been rebuilt on the same sites. Many historic Hindu temples in Varanasi were demolished and mosques built in their place after the 13th-century, particularly in the reign of Aurangzeb in the 17th century.[4][5] Along with the destruction of Hindu temples in Varanasi, Aurangzeb tried to change the name of the city from Benares to Muhammadabad.[6] Sites such as the Kashi Vishwanath Temple / Gyanvapi Mosque are a disputed site, a source of claims and counterclaims of religious intolerance.[7][8]

Shiva

Kashi Vishwanath Temple golden top
Kashi Vishwanath Temple: Kashi Vishwanath Temple is one of the most famous Hindu temples and is dedicated to Shiva. This is one of the most worshiped Shiva temple in Hinduism and has been mentioned in the Puranas including the Kashi Khanda (section) of Skanda Purana. The original Vishwanath temple was destroyed by the army of Qutb-ud-din Aibak in 1194 CE, when he defeated the Raja of Kannauj as a commander of Mohammad Ghori. The temple has been destroyed and rebuilt several times in the past 800 years and the existing structure was erected in 18th century.
Kaal Bhairav Mandir: Kaal Bhairav Mandir is an ancient temple of Varanasi near the main Post Office, Vishesharganj. Kaal Bhairav is believed to be the guardian deity of Varanasi.
Mrityunjay Mahadev Mandir: Mrityunjay Mahadev Mandir of Shiva is situated on the route from Daranagar to the Kalbhairav temple. Just beside this temple there is a well of much religious importance. Its water is said to be a mixture of several underground streams and good for eliminating several diseases.
New Vishwanath Mandir (Birla Mandir): The New Vishwanath Mandir, also called Birla Mandir, mainly funded by Birla family, was built as a replica of the old Kashi Vishwanath Temple. Planned by Madan Mohan Malaviya, the temple is part of the Banaras Hindu University campus, and represents national revival. The temple is open to people of all castes and religions. There are nine temples in the Sri Vishwanath Temple campus, including Vishwanath (Lingam), Nataraja, Parvati, Ganesha, Saraswati, Panchamukhi Mahadev, Hanuman, and Nandi. There are idols of Shiva and Lakshmi Narayana.
New Vishwanath Temple
New Vishwanath Temple
 
New Vishwanath Temple side view
New Vishwanath Temple side view
Shri Tilbhandeshwar Mahadev Mandir: Shri Tilbhandeshwar Mahadev Mandir is one of the oldest temples in Varanasi, located near Bengal Tola Inter College and next to the famous weavers colony of Madanpura. It is said that, here, Tilbhandeshwar Shiva Lingam increases by a nominal length every year. Besides Tilbhandeshwar Mahadev, Vibhandeshwar, Parvati, Bhairava, Ayyappan and other Hindu deities are visible here. This temple represents a unique combination of Malyali and Banarsi culture. Famous celebrations here include Mahashivaratri, Makar Sankranti, Shravan, Navratri, Ayyappan Puja etc.
Nepali Mandir: Constructed in the 19th century A.D by the King of Nepal, Maharajadhiraja Rana Bahadur Shah, the temple is a replica of the Pashupatinath Temple in Kathmandu. Temple is also known as Kanthwala Mandir and Mini Khajuraho.
Ratneshwar Mahadev temple is the leaning temple near the Manikarnika Ghat (the Burning Ghat). A lower part of the temple remains submerged into the river at times making it impossible to perform worship and rituals.[9][10]
Shakti temples
Annapurna Devi Mandir: Annapurna Devi Mandir is located near the Kashi Vishwanath temple, there is a nice temple of Devi Annapurna, believed to be the "Goddess of Food". She is a form of Parvati. She is also known as Kashipuraadeeshwari ("Queen of Kasi").
Vishalakshi Temple: Vishalakshi Temple is dedicated to Vishalakshi (means wide-eyed) or Parvati,the consort of lord shiva
Lalita Gauri Mandir: Temple dedicated to the goddess Lalita Gauri
Amethi Temple: Temple dedicated to the goddess Bala Tripurasundari
Durga Kund Mandir: The architecture of Durga Mandir is of a Nagara style, which is typical of North India. The temple has a rectangular tank of water called the Durga Kund ("Kund" meaning a pond or pool.) The temple has multi-tiered spires and is stained red with ochre, representing the red colour of Durga. The Kund was initially connected directly to the river thus the water was automatically replenished. This channel was later closed, locking off the water supply, which is replenished only by rain or drainage from the Temple. Every year on the occasion of Nag Panchami, the act of depictingVishnu reclining on the coiled-up mystical snake or "kaliya" is recreated in the Kund.[citation needed]
Vishalakshi Temple
Vishalakshi Temple
 
18th century Durga Temple, overlooking the Durga Kund
18th century Durga Temple, overlooking the Durga Kund
Sankata Devi Mandir: Sankata Devi Mandir is situated near the Sindhia Ghat, there is an important temple of the "Goddess of Remedy", Devi Sankatha. Inside its premises there is a huge statue of a lion. There are also nine temples of nine planets near to this temple[citation needed]
Vishnu
In addition to Shiva and Shakti temples, some of the most important ancient temples in Varanasi are dedicated to Vishnu.[11]

Adi Keshava temple is one of the oldest temples in Kashi and is considered as the oldest temple of Kashi, The temple finds a mention in the Kashi Khanda of the Skanda Puranam. This temple is considered to be older than Kashi Vishwanath Temple.
Manikarnika Ghat Vishnu temple
Bindu Madhav temple
Hanuman
Sankat Mochan Mandir: Sankat Mochan Mandir is dedicated to Hanuman. It is very popular with locals. It is the location for many yearly religious as well as cultural festivals. On 7 March 2006 one of the three explosions carried out by Islamic militants hit the temple, while the aarti, in which numerous worshippers and wedding attendees participated, was in progress.[12]
Surya
Varanasi has been home to numerous Surya-related temples.[13] Predominantly Surya is worshipped in following twelve forms in Varanasi.[14][15]

Arun Aditya
Drupad Aditya
Ganga Aditya
Keshava Aditya
Kakholkh Aditya
Lolark Aditya
Mayukh Aditya
Sambha Aditya
Uttarark Aditya
Vimal Aditya
Vriddh Aditya
Yama Aditya
Others
Bharat Mata Mandir: Bharat Mata Mandir ("Mother India Temple") is located on the Mahatma Gandhi Kashi Vidyapith campus in Varanasi, India. Instead of traditional statues of gods and goddesses, this temple has a huge map of undivided India carved in marble. This temple is dedicated to Bharat Mata (Mother India) and was the first of its kind in the world.[16][better source needed]
Relief map of India in Bharat Mata Mandir
Relief map of India in Bharat Mata Mandir
Bhojpuri Maai Mandir
Bhojpuri Maai Mandir ("Mother Bhojpuri Temple") is a temple in which the presiding deity is Bhojpuri Maai, representing the Bhojpuri language. This temple is located in Jeevandeep Public School campus, Baralalpur, Varanasi, India.[17] There are around 150 million Bhojpuriyas in the world and they give Bhojpuri language the same status as their mother. It is one of the temples in the world for worshipping a language as a god or goddess.[18]

Dhanvantari
In Varanaseya Sanskrit Vishwavidyalaya, Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh state, one statue of Dhanvantari is present in the university museum.

Maharaja Divodas(Grand son of Dhanvantari First king of Kashi) One Black stoned statue facing south is situated in a personal property of a Brahman family in Chowk area, varanasi. It's said that the Idol was found beneath the premises of that property when it was getting constructed and the Brahman couldn't figure out who it was hence decided to have it drifted in Ganga next morning, however same night lord came in his dream and introduced himself as KashiRaja Divodas and asked to remain his idol where it was found, hence he built this temple in his house and his successors are still serving the deity there. This temple said to be quite awakened and spiritual as the idol emerged on its own and it is a local belief that if someone worships here with all his faith, deity cures his illness. Address- CK 14/42, Nandan Sahu Lane

Saints and scholars
Tulsi Manas Mandir: Tulsi Manas Mandir is dedicated to Lord Rama. It is situated at the place where Tulsidas, the great medieval seer, lived and wrote the epic "Shri Ramcharitmanas", which narrates the life of Rama, the hero of the Ramayana. Verses from Tulsidas’ epic are inscribed on the walls. It is close to the Durga Temple.
Vyasa Mandir: Situated in Ramnagar, Vyasa Mandir is dedicated to Vyasa, author of the Mahabharata
Damage and destruction
Varanasi and its Hindu temples were a target for raids and destruction during the Islamic invasion and rule of the Indian subcontinent. Various Sultans and Mughal emperors demolished Hindu temples and built mosques in their place starting in late 12th-century, particularly between the 13th-century and 18th-century, such as in the reign of Aurangzeb.[4][5] The destruction of Hindu temples in Varanasi was widespread over time, with Aurangzeb even trying to change the name of the city from Benares to Muhammadabad.[6]

## Kashi Yatra

Kashi Yatra (Sanskrit: काशीयात्रा, romanized: Kāśīyātrā, lit. 'Pilgrimage to Kashi') refers to the yatra (pilgrimage) to the city of Kashi (Varanasi) in Hinduism.[1] Regarded to be among the holiest of cities in Hinduism, pilgrims undertake a journey to this city due to the belief that it would allow them to achieve mukti (salvation). The significance of this pilgrimage is explained in the Skanda Purana.[2] Kashi is referred to as an important tirtha (holy site) in Hindu literature, with the Kashi Vishwanath temple of the city considered to be among the most sacred sites dedicated to the deity Shiva.[3]

It also refers to a name of a ceremony during a Hindu wedding: A bridegroom expresses the desire to become an ascetic and undertake a pilgrimage to Kashi, carrying slippers, an umbrella, a bamboo fan, and other objects that may vary according to regional traditions. While he walks away from the wedding mandapa, the bride's father persuades the bridegroom to return, and marry his daughter.[4]



## Varanasi Ghats

Thumbnail for Ghats in Varanasi
Ghats in Varanasi
Ghats in Varanasi are riverfront steps leading to the banks of the Ganges river. The city has 84 ghats. Most of the ghats are bathing and puja ceremonial...
20 KB (1,607 words) - 10:48, 1 November 2025
Thumbnail for Dev Deepavali (Varanasi)
Dev Deepavali (Varanasi)
devotees from the holy city of Varanasi, surrounding villages, and across the country gather in the evening on the ghats of the Ganges to watch the aarti...
9 KB (859 words) - 05:07, 5 November 2025
Thumbnail for Varanasi
Varanasi
"Ghats of Benares, 1–20". National Informatics Centre. Archived from the original on 13 November 2012. Retrieved 3 November 2012. "Ghats of Varanasi,...
237 KB (21,102 words) - 20:13, 6 November 2025
Thumbnail for Ghat
Ghat
numerous significant ghats along the Ganges are the Varanasi ghats (the city of Varanasi has 88 ghats) and generically the "ghats of the Ganges". Most...
9 KB (796 words) - 12:10, 25 August 2025
Thumbnail for Manikarnika Ghat
Manikarnika Ghat
Manikarnika Ghat is located in Varanasi, India and is flanked by the Dashashwamedh Ghat and the Scindia Ghat The Manikarnika Ghat is one of the oldest ghats in...
6 KB (620 words) - 09:04, 4 September 2025
Thumbnail for Dashashwamedh Ghat
Dashashwamedh Ghat
Dashashwamedh Ghat is a main ghat in Varanasi located on the Ganges River in Uttar Pradesh, India. It is located close to Vishwanath Temple. There are...
4 KB (309 words) - 14:02, 25 August 2025
Thumbnail for List of tourist attractions in Varanasi
List of tourist attractions in Varanasi
across the city attract pilgrims. The ghats and the Buddhist site Sarnath attract tourists from abroad. Varanasi is one of the oldest cities in the world...
9 KB (249 words) - 16:12, 18 June 2025
Thumbnail for Assi Ghat
Assi Ghat
It is one of the biggest ghats in Varanasi. The Assi and Ganges rivers converge at Assi Ghat. To most visitors in Varanasi, it is known for being a place...
7 KB (609 words) - 13:49, 25 August 2025
Thumbnail for Ganga Mahal Ghat
Ganga Mahal Ghat
Mahal Ghat (Hindi: गंगा महल घाट) is one of the main ghats on the Ganges River in Varanasi, India. Constructed in 1830 by the Narayan dynasty, the ghat is...
6 KB (225 words) - 15:42, 25 August 2025
Thumbnail for Shivala Ghat
Shivala Ghat
Shivala Ghat is one of the largest[citation needed] ghats in Varanasi, India. It was built by Balwant Singh, a ruler of Benares State, in honour of Hindu...
2 KB (126 words) - 20:08, 25 August 2025
Thumbnail for Ratneshwar Mahadev temple
Ratneshwar Mahadev temple (redirect from Leaning temple of Varanasi)
the summer. The Ratneshwar Mahadev Temple is situated at Manikarnika Ghat, Varanasi. The temple has developed a nine-degree slant. It was built by Aman...
10 KB (925 words) - 05:50, 11 October 2025
Thumbnail for Sant Ravidas Ghat
Sant Ravidas Ghat
Sant Ravidas Ghat is the southernmost and largest ghat in Varanasi. To most visitors to Varanasi, it is known for being an important religious place for...
7 KB (532 words) - 20:12, 25 August 2025
Thumbnail for Tulsi Ghat
Tulsi Ghat
Tulsi Ghat is one of the ghats in Varanasi, in India. It is named after poet Tulsidas who lived there while he wrote the Ramcharitmanas and Hanuman Chalisa...
3 KB (262 words) - 11:01, 12 October 2025
Religion in Varanasi
(2013). "The Ghats of Varanasi". Retrieved 28 January 2017. Singh 2009, p. 32. Jacobsen 2013, p. 136. Uttar Pradesh Tourism – Varanasi, Department of...
24 KB (2,507 words) - 18:24, 11 September 2025
Thumbnail for Lalita Ghat
Lalita Ghat
Lalita Ghat (Hindi: ललिता घाट) is one of the main ghats on the Ganges River in Varanasiin the state of Uttar Pradesh. The ghat is named after Hindu Goddess...
7 KB (392 words) - 14:03, 25 August 2025
Thumbnail for Munshi Ghat
Munshi Ghat
Munshi Ghat is one of the Ghats in Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh, India. Built in the year 1812, Munshi Ghat is named after Sridhara Narayana Munshi, who was...
2 KB (183 words) - 14:00, 25 August 2025
Thumbnail for Scindia Ghat
Scindia Ghat
Scindia Ghat (Hindi: सिंधिया घाट) is one of the ghats in Varanasi and borders Manikarnika, a place of Hindu cremation, to the north. At this ghat, a tilted...
2 KB (189 words) - 14:13, 25 August 2025
Thumbnail for 2010 Varanasi bombing
2010 Varanasi bombing
Varanasi bombing was a blast that occurred on 7 December 2010, in one of the holiest Hindu cities, Varanasi. The explosion occurred at Sheetla Ghat,...
15 KB (1,362 words) - 17:21, 20 October 2025
The Eken: Benaras e Bibhishika
Pramatha, arrives in Varanasi on invitation of Subimal, the friend of Pramatha. As they navigate the city’s narrow lanes and sacred ghats, they discover clues...
15 KB (1,278 words) - 19:24, 9 October 2025
Thumbnail for Lal Bahadur Shastri Airport
Lal Bahadur Shastri Airport (redirect from Varanasi - Babatpur Airport)
airport serving Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh, India. It is located at Babatpur, 26 km (16 mi) northwest of Varanasi. Formerly known as Varanasi Airport.



## Ganga Arati Varanasi

Skip to content

Home
Book a Tour
Boat Rides
Dev Diwali Boat Booking
Discover Varanasi
About Us
Contact Us
Shop
Quick Booking: +‪91-8595256696‬
Home / Travel / Ganga Aarti in Varanasi – A Dance of Light and Devotion
Ganga Aarti in Varanasi – A Dance of Light and Devotion
January 19, 2025
Varanasi Guru
The Ganga Aarti (often called the “Aarti of Ganga”) is a daily spiritual ritual held along the banks of the Ganges River, primarily at Dashashwamedh Ghat in Varanasi. This devotional ceremony is a way of honoring the Ganges, believed to cleanse sins and purify the soul, and offers visitors an immersive experience of prayer, gratitude, and reverence. Varanasi, which hosts 100,000–150,000 visitors daily, sees this aarti as one of its top attractions, drawing large crowds right after the Kashi Vishwanath Temple and Manikarnika Ghat.

The popularity of the Ganga Aarti has transformed it into one of India’s largest daily gatherings, where devotees, spiritual seekers, and tourists come together to witness this powerful display of devotion.

Ganga aarti Varanasi timing
Photo by Arti Agarwal
Table of Contents
Story and History of Varanasi Ganga Aarti
Choreography or Steps of Ganga Aarti
Meaning of Elements Used in Ganga Aarti
Where is Ganga Aarti Performed in Varanasi?
Ganga Aarti Time in Varanasi
Experiencing Ganga Aarti in Varanasi from a Boat
Ganga Poojan Ritual Booking
Ganga Aarti Viewing Tips
Story and History of Varanasi Ganga Aarti
The story of the Ganga Aarti is deeply rooted in Hindu mythology. Legend holds that Goddess Ganga descended from heaven to earth in response to King Bhagiratha’s prayers to free his ancestors’ souls. The intense force of her descent was tamed by Lord Shiva, who caught her in his locks to protect the earth from her mighty flow. This legendary tale is commemorated in Varanasi’s Ganga Aarti, an homage to Ganga’s sacred role as the “purifier” of souls.

Historically, the aarti ritual became established in Varanasi centuries ago, evolving as an integral part of its spiritual landscape. Today, the Dashashwamedh Ghat aarti is celebrated in a synchronized ritual, performed by local priests with reverence and precision.

Varanasi Banaras Kashi all names and their meaning with story
Choreography or Steps of Ganga Aarti
The Ganga Aarti choreography is a structured and synchronized set of movements, performed by seven priests who hold aloft large brass lamps, conch shells, and incense while chanting mantras. The flow of the aarti follows a sequence meant to evoke a divine ambiance, with each movement symbolizing a gesture of gratitude to the Ganges.

Blowing the Conch Shell: Marks the start, symbolizing purity and positivity.
Waving Incense: Helps cleanse the air and invite divine blessings.
Circling Brass Lamps: Large, multi-tiered lamps with several diya flames represent light and purity.
Chanting Sacred Hymns: The sounds of Vedic mantras fill the air, creating a spiritually charged atmosphere.
Offering Flowers: Fresh flower offerings symbolize love and reverence toward the Ganges.
Ganga aarti Varanasi booking
Photo by Iqbal farooz
Meaning of Elements Used in Ganga Aarti
The items used in the aarti carry significant symbolism:

Conch Shells (Shankh): Believed to remove negativity and welcome positivity.
Brass Lamps (Deepak): Represent the light of the divine and purification.
Incense Sticks (Agarbatti): Purify the surroundings and are believed to attract positive energy.
Flowers (Pushpanjali): Offer respect and honor.
Water and Diya: Symbolize the eternal flow of Ganga and the light it brings to life.
Each of these elements enhances the ceremony’s sensory appeal, enveloping viewers in the mystical aura of the Ganges.

Where is Ganga Aarti Performed in Varanasi?
In Varanasi, the evening aartis are grand at Dashashwamedh Ghat, where multiple priests perform synchronized rituals, attracting large crowds. Rajendra Prasad Ghat, located next to Dashashwamedh, also hosts a significant aarti, extending the grand experience.

Ganga aarti Varanasi photos
Ganga Aarti at Dashaswamedh Ghat | Photo by Mohit Khetrapal
The morning aartis take place at Assi Ghat, known for its serene Subah-e-Banaras ritual, combining yoga, meditation, and prayers. Panchganga Ghat offers a more intimate morning aarti, especially notable during the Akashdeep ritual in Kartik month.

Varanasi_Morning_Aarti_Heritage_walk
surreal morning Aarti at Assi Ghat
At the smaller ghats, you can find tranquil aartis led by single priests, offering a peaceful atmosphere. These include Harishchandra Ghat, Gaay Ghat, Munshi Ghat, Kedar Ghat, and Shivala Ghat, each providing a quiet, reflective experience for those seeking a more personal spiritual moment.

Ganga aarti panchganga ghat Varanasi
Morning Aarti at Panchganga Ghat
Ganga Aarti Time in Varanasi
Aarti Type	Location	Winter Timing	Summer Timing	Notes
Evening Aarti	Dashashwamedh Ghat	6:00 PM	7:00 PM	Arrive early to secure a good viewing spot as it gets crowded quickly.
Morning Aarti	Assi Ghat	6:00 AM	5:00 AM	Part of the Subah-e-Banaras experience.
Morning Aarti	Panchganga Ghat	5:30 AM	5:30 AM	Timing remains consistent across seasons.
It is advisable to arrive early, as both locations can get crowded quickly. The evening aarti, in particular, fills up fast, so planning ahead is crucial for a good viewing spot.

Ganga aarti panchganga dev diwali Varanasi
Evening Ganga Aarti at Panchganga Ghat on the night of Dev Deepawali
Experiencing Ganga Aarti in Varanasi from a Boat
Watching the aarti from a boat provides a unique perspective, as boats line up along the ghats to offer unobstructed views. Both private and shared boats are available, with options to pre-book or find a boat directly at the ghats. However, due to high demand, especially during peak times, boats often get sold out days in advance. To ensure you don’t miss out on this unforgettable experience, it’s crucial to pre-book rather than rely on on-the-spot bookings.

Our Ganga Aarti Boat Ride takes you across 84 ghats, providing a panoramic view of the river and its sacred surroundings. The tour concludes with the grand Dashashwamedh Ghat aarti, offering a spectacular and spiritual experience. Don’t wait until the last moment – secure your spot today!

Ganga Poojan Ritual Booking
Before the Ganga Aarti, the sacred ritual of Ganga Poojan offers a unique opportunity to honor and seek blessings from the holy Ganges. Guided by a priest, you’ll participate in offerings of diyas, flowers, and prayers, immersing yourself in this profound spiritual tradition.

Ganga aarti pooja Varanasi booking
We offer direct bookings for Ganga Poojan in collaboration with Ganga Seva Nidhi, ensuring the amount you pay goes directly to the trust that manages and preserves this ritual. As a gesture of gratitude, this experience also includes complimentary reserved seats for viewing the Ganga Aarti. This is our way of giving back to Kashi while allowing you to be part of its timeless traditions.

Limited spots available – pre-book now!

Ganga Aarti Viewing Tips
Arrive Early: Arriving at least 45 minutes before the start is essential to secure a good spot.
Select the Best Viewing Location: Dashashwamedh Ghat for an up-close view, or from a boat on the river for a wider perspective.
Show Respect: Maintain a quiet and reverent atmosphere during the ceremony.
Photography: Feel free to capture the event but be mindful not to disturb others’ experience.
One Response
 Jason Allen Jack Beeching says:
06/04/2025 at 1:27 pm
I’m impressed by how well you explained this.

Reply
Leave a Reply
Your email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *

Comment *

Name * 

Email * 

Website 


Picture of Varanasi Guru
Varanasi Guru
Connecting ancient Varanasi to the modern world by promoting local culture, art, history & stories. Unlock the secrets of Kashi with #varanasiguru!
See All Posts
Share it with your friends 

Book Varanasi Heritage Walk
Book Guided Walk or a Boat Tour Online
Unlock the secrets of Kashi, where legends and history come alive with every step. Explore the ancient temples, vibrant ghats, and hidden corners of this timeless city.

Book a Heritage Walk, Boat Ride, or Guided Tour today and experience Varanasi like never before!

Book a Tour
Don’t listen to us, listen to them
Varanasi Guru Tour & Heritage walk reviews
Varanasi Guru Reviews

Exceptional Customer Service
Verified by Trustindex
We love our travellers. Thankfully, the feeling’s mutual.

Buy Merch
Benaras 1959 -  Vintage Map Tote Bag with Zippers
Benaras 1959 – Vintage Map Tote Bag with Zippers
Rated
4.72
out of 5
₹900.00 Original price was: ₹900.00.₹699.00Current price is: ₹699.00.
Add to cart
Recommended Posts
Varanasi Guru
Connecting ancient Varanasi to the modern world through immersive boat rides, heritage walks, and cultural tours. Discover local art, history, and stories as you unlock the secrets of Kashi with #VaranasiGuru!
Talk to us at Hello@varanasiguru.com

Explore Tours
Varanasi Boat Rides
Ganga Aarti Booking
Varanasi Heritage Walks
Dev Diwali Boat Booking
Morning Yoga in Varanasi
Quick Links
About Us
Contact Us
Privacy Policy
Terms & Conditions
Refund & Cancellation
Search Varanasi
Looking for something specific? Search below.

© 2025 Made in Banaras by Gods Are Marketing



## Main Shiva temples - Varanasi

10/11/2025, 12:23 Main Shiva Temples - Varanasi Temples
Varanasi Temples
Temples of Varanasi as referred to in Kashi Khand
Home
Latest Updates
Spiritual Posts
Free Consultation
You Tube Videos of Kashi
AAPA STAMBESHWAR
Lord Shiva was narrating the various sacred Teerths (Ponds), Koop (Wells) and places of worship in Kashi. Lord Shiva described such places with pleasure (Kashi
Khand, Chapter 97).
In the vicinity of Madhyameshwar is the Aapa Stambeshwar Ling. By worshipping this Ling, the devotee is blessed with Brahma Gyan (ultimate knowledge). In the
present day context, this may be taken as good education/studies.
(AAPA STAMBESHWAR)
LOCATION OF AAPA STAMBESHWAR
Aapa Stambeshwar is located at K-53/66, Dara Nagar. People can approach this temple by rickshaw through Bisheshwarganj/GPO and walk through the locality of
Madhyameshwar temple. The landmark for this temple is a well and Boodhwa Baba temple (Hanuman).
TYPES OF POOJA
The temple is open throughout the day. People can perform pooja as per their convenience with sacred Ganges water and flowers etc.
ATMA VEERESHWAR
According to Kashi Khand, Chapater 82, Lord Shiva described the power of Veereshwar Ling as under :
Once a kingdom was ruled by a very religious minded ruler named Amitrajit. He was a staunch devotee of Lord Vishnu and he made it a rule that all the citizens of
his kingdom also became devotees of Lord Vishnu. One day Narad Rishi visited his palace and was welcomed with due respect by the King.
(ATMA VEERESHWAR)
As per the direction of Narad Rishi, King Amitrajit saved one beautiful girl called Malayagandini from the clutches of one evil person. The King subsequently
married her and they came to Kashi and were immediately happy with the beautiful surroundings. In due course, Malayagandini was blessed with a handsome male
child, who was destined to become 16 years old, immediately after birth. However, since he was born in an inauspicious planetary combination, the Ministers of the
King told the Queen that she would have to sacrifice the child, otherwise the King would die.
In order to save the King, she sent the child to Vikata Devi. But no one was inclined to slay the handsome boy who had been 16 years of age by then. The boy
undertook severe penance of Lord Shiva, whereupon Lord Shiva appeared before him in form of a Ling. This Ling was named by Lord Shiva as Veereshwar Ling.
According to Lord Shiva, a person who performs Pooja, Abhishek and archana of Veereshwar Ling attains all sort of happiness, prosperity and success.
Kashi Khand, Chapter 83, states that a person who performs pooja of Veereshwar gets the benefit of doing pooja of three crore Lingas. (The time after twilight –
sandhya kaal, is considered night time).
https://varanasitemples.in/category/shiva-temples/main-shiva-temples/ 1/13
10/11/2025, 12:23 Main Shiva Temples - Varanasi Temples
——————————————————————————————————-
Kashi Khand, Chapter 83, Shlok 112
य ु वीरेश्वरं  लङ्गं नक्तमभ्यच  यष्य त
तेन  त्रको टसं ा न  लङ्गानीहाऽ
 च   त
ा न वै
A devotee who performs pooja of (Atma) Veereshwar Ling (in Kashi), at night, will get the punya benefit of performing pooja of three crore lings, here
itself.
———————————————————————————————————
It is considered auspicious to worship this Ling during Chaturdasi nights without going to sleep or bed. It is also considered auspicious to perform abhishek of this
Ling with Panch Amritam (five ingredients namely milk, curd, honey, sugar and clarified butter) (Kashi Khand ibid).
——————————————————————————————————-
Kashi Khand, Chapter 83, Shlok 117
यदन्यत्र फलं  लङ्गे को टपुष्पप्रदान
तः
त
देक े नैव पुष्पेण वीरेशे नाऽत्र संशयः
Whatever punya is derived by offering one crore flowers to other lings, the same punya is derived by offering just one flower to (Atma) Veereshwar in
Kashi. There is no doubt about that.
———————————————————————————————————
Kashi Khand, Chapter 11, mentions the importance of pooja/archana of Atma Veereshwar for being blessed with a child. One Sage Vishwanar and his pious wife
prayed at various places in Kashi and finally arrived at the Siddha Peeth of Atma Veereshwar. He performed all rituals and rites at this temple for many months,
reciting a prayer called Abhilasha Ashtakam and one day he saw a boy aged eight years standing near the Ling. The sage started worshipping the boy with the same
fervour as one would worship Lord Shiva with.
The boy was none other than Lord Shiva himself who directed his devotees to recite Abhilasha Ashtakam for one year, as was done by Sage Vishwanar, which will
certainly result in progeny for childless couples. Subsequently, the boy disappeared into the Atma Veereshwar Ling.
Though this Ling is mentioned as Veereshwar in Kashi Khand, presently, this ling is called as Atma Veereshwar or the soul of Veereshwar.
LOCATION OF THE TEMPLE
Atma Veereshwar temple is located at Ck-7/158, Scindia Ghat which is a famous locality in Varanasi. This place can be reached by boat through Scindia Ghat.
Alternatively one can travel in cycle rickshaw upto Chowk and walk down the gullies to reach the temple. Reciting Rudra Japa at Atma Veereshwar temple is very
fruitful.
LOCATION OF ATMA VEERESHWAR TEMPLE AS PER GOOGLE MAPS IS GIVEN BELOW
https://www.google.com/maps/place/Atmaveereshwar+Mahadev+Temple/@25.3125278,83.0128632,17z/data=!3m1!4b1!4m5!3m4!1s0x398e2e21e76c84cd:0x85f47e9
Please watch our YouTube Video about Atma Veereshwar at following Link
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=enf8IFQT_u4&t=5s
TYPES OF POOJAS
The temple is open for worship 05.00 a.m. to 11.30 a.m. and from 12.30 p.m. to 9.30. Special Aarti is held from 07.00 to 8.30 p.m. For doing special pooja, it is
advisable to consult the Poojari before hand.
DHARMESHWAR
Goddess Parvaty asked Lord Shiva to describe the various important Shiv Lings in Kashi. Lord Shiva told her, once upon a time, in Anand Van (Kashi) Yam Raj
installed a Ling and underwent severe penance in prayer of Lord Shiva. His prayers went on during extremely cold winters and torrid summers. The intensity of his
prayers went on increasing; he stood on one leg and prayed for several years and finally stood on one toe for several days during his penance. At last Lord Shiva
appeared before him and conferred the title of Dharma Raja on Yam Raj. (In some mantras like Sandhya Vandana, the mantra reads as Yamaya Dharma Rajaya etc.
etc.) The Ling installed by Yam Raj was named by Lord Shiva as Dharmeshwar Ling. On seeing Lord Shiva in person, Yam Raj was dumb struck and could not ask
what he wanted. He was overwhelmed with joy.
https://varanasitemples.in/category/shiva-temples/main-shiva-temples/ 2/13
10/11/2025, 12:23 Main Shiva Temples - Varanasi Temples
(DHARMESHWAR)
Lord Shiva took the initiative and told Yam Raj that the latter should do proper justice to people who die, those committing sins should face punishment and those
performing punya Karma (virtuous deeds) should go to heaven. The judgement should be fair. Those who live in Kashi and engage in pooja etc. should be free from
all sins committed in any generation. Yam Raj as such is for evil persons/sinners and he is Dharma Raj for good people.
Those persons who take bath in Dharma Koop and perform pooja of Dharmeshwar are cleansed of all sins. Yam Raj agreed to do as he was directed by Lord Shiva.
(Kashi Khand, Chapter 78).
——————————————————————————————————-
Kashi Khand, Chapter 78, Shlok 48
क ृ  ाऽप्यघाना मह य: सह ं धम श्वरं पश्य त
दैवयोगात्
सहेत
नो जा
तु स नारक  व्यथां कथां त
दीयां  द व क ु व तेऽमरा:
Even after committing thousands of sins, if a devotee – by God’s Grace – worships Dharmeshwar, he will not have to face the hardships of hell, on the
contrary devtaas in heaven will keep discussing about him.
———————————————————————————————————
To this day, it is believed that those who live in Kashi, performing regular poojas etc. are cleansed of all sins.
LOCATION OF THE TEMPLE
Dharmeshwar Temple is located at D-2/21, Mir Ghat. The temple is approachable from a famous locality called Dashashwamedh. People can travel upto
Dashashwamedh Vishwanath Gulli by Rickshaw and then to the temple via famous Vishalakshi Gauri temple by foot. A devotee who has finished darshan of
Visweshwar Temple, can proceed towards the Saraswati Phatak gate and walk towards Vishalakshi Gauri temple, to reach Dharmeshwar. Alternatively, they can
travel to Mirghat by boat and climb the steps.
The entire area covering Dharmeshwar, Dharma Koop, Vishalakshi Devi etc. is a powerful Shakti Peeth (seat of vital energy) and any prayer offered at this place
begets maximum benefits to the devotees.
Please watch our YouTube Video about Dharmeshwar at following Link
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6zhg8dmD8V8&t=4s
TYPES OF POOJAS
The temple is open for worship from 05.00 a.m. to 12.30 p.m. and from 05.00 p.m. to 07.30 p.m. Aarties are performed at 05.00 a.m. and 07.00 p.m.
Performing pooja in Dharmeshwar temple in the month of Kartik (October 20-November-20), Shukla Paksha Ashtami, 8th day after Amavasya, is considered very
auspicious.
There is a well nearby known as Dharma Koop. Shraaddh Karma performed here after taking bath in Dharma Koop is equivalent to performing Shraaddh in Gaya.
For doing special pooja etc., it is advisable to consult the Poojari before hand.
GABHASTEESHWAR
Once Lord Surya installed a Shiv Ling and a devi idol at Panchanada Teerth (Panchganga Ghat) and started immensely propitiating Lord Shiva. (Importance of
Panchganga Ghat is described elsewhere).
The intensity of Lord Surya’s prayers started reflecting in the extreme heat generated thereby. Sunrays started getting warmer and warmer. Finally it became
extremely unbearable for all living beings and all physical activities practically came to a standstill.
Lord Shiva and Goddess Parvaty came to know about this and they appeared in person in front of Lord Surya. Lord Surya opened his eyes and started singing
praises of Goddess Parvaty and Lord Shiva whereupon both of them became extremely happy. They granted several divine wishes to Lord Surya.
https://varanasitemples.in/category/shiva-temples/main-shiva-temples/ 3/13
10/11/2025, 12:23 Main Shiva Temples - Varanasi Temples
Lord Shiva told Lord Surya that the Shiv Ling installed by Lord Surya will be known as Gabhasteeshwar. A person who takes bath at Pancha Nada Teerth
(Panchganga) and worships Gabhastheeswar will be free from all sins and will certainly attain Moksha. (Kashi Khand, Chapter 49)
——————————————————————————————————-
Kashi Khand, Chapter 49, Shlok 77
त्वया प्र त
  
तं  लङ्गं गभ ीश्वरसं  
त
म्
से व
तं भ क्तभावेन सव  स द्धसमप कम्
(Lord Shiva says to the Sun God), whoever devotedly worships this Linga named Gabhastishwar, installed by you, will get all the achievements/
accomplishments.
———————————————————————————————————
LOCATION OF GABHASTEESHWAR
Gabhastheeshwar is located at K-24/34, Mangala Gauri Temple. Devotees can travel upto Bhaironath by auto or cycle rickshaw and walk upto this place. Mangala
Gauri temple is a famous landmark. Alternatively, they can take a boat ride upto Panchganga Ghat and reach this temple through Ghats.
Please watch our YouTube Video about Gabhasteeshwar at following Link
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=15x9DZdnTno
TYPES OF POOJA
The temple is open from 05.00 a.m. to 01.00 p.m. and from 03.00 p.m. to 10 p.m. Aarties are performed in the evening. For doing any special pooja etc., it is
advisable to contact the Poojari.
Gabhasteeshwar has been given much importance with respect to Sun. Devotees who are having afflictions in their Horoscope on account of planet Sun’s adverse
position, get relief by worshipping this temple since the temple houses Gabhasteeshwar (Shiv Ling installed by Lord Surya) and Mayukh Aditya (one of the places of
worship of Lord Surya in Kashi).
POOJARIS OF THE TEMPLE
Shri Manoj Kumar Pandey is the chief priest and his cell number is (0)9305645502. Other priest is Shri Umesh Kumar Sharma whose cell number is
(0)9450284728.
KEDARESHWAR
Kedareshwar is a Shiva temple in Himalayas which is one of the twelve jyotirlingas. According to Kashi Khand, one gentleman performed the upnayanam ceremony
of his son named Vashisht at Ujjain. The boy, Vashisht, was very religious and performed all poojas including Linga pooja etc. He used to visit Kedareshwar Temple
in Himalayas alongwith his Guru regularly and perform pooja of Lord Kedareshwar.
Once, on the way to Kedareshwar, the Guru died unfortunately and since he had all along done only good deeds, he found a place for himself at Mount Kailas.
Vashisht who was 12 at that time, got an enlightenment that those who go for having darshan of Kedareshwar are blessed with all punyas. He then went and settled
down at Kashi.
https://varanasitemples.in/category/shiva-temples/main-shiva-temples/ 4/13
10/11/2025, 12:23 Main Shiva Temples - Varanasi Temples
But on all Chaitra Month Poornima days (March 20-April 21), Vashisht (who remained a Brahmachari) used to visit Kedareshwar Ling at Himalayas and this went
on for 61 years. But due to old age, he could not move out and he started praying to Lord Shiva at Kashi. Lord Shiva blessed him with a wish and Vashisht requested
that Lord Shiva should kindly appear at Kashi itself as Kedareshwar.
——————————————————————————————————-
Kashi Khand, Chapter 77, Shlok 46
तुषारा द्रम् समारुह्य क े दारं वीक्ष्य यत्फलं
त
त्फलं सप्तगु 
ण
तं काश्यां क े दारदश ने
Worshipping Kedareshwar in Kashi will yield seven times punya which accrues from worshipping Kedar Ling in Himalayas.
———————————————————————————————————
Lord Shiva was overwhelmed with the sincerity and devotion of Vashisht and granted accordingly. He appeared as Kedareshwar at Kashi and told Vashisht that
performing pooja at Kedareshwar at Kashi will yield seven times greater punya as compared to performing pooja at Kedareshwar at Himalayas (Kashi Khand,
Chapter 77).
(KEDARESHWAR)
Gauri Kund, Hans teerth and Manasarovar teerth find mention in Kashi Khand in reference to Kedareshwar but now only Gauri Kund remains. Manasarovar and
Hans Teerth have dried up.
People observe vrath (fast) on Chaitra Month (March 20-April 20) Shukla Paksha Chaturdasi and break their fast on Poornima day, the next day, after performing
pooja of Kedareshwar. This is as stated in Kashi Khand where Vashisht used to pray Lord Kedareshwar on Chaitra Poornima days (as mentioned in para above).
——————————————————————————————————-
Kashi Khand, Chapter 77, Shlok 05
गृहा द्व नग ते पुं स क े दारम भ न  
तं
जन्मद्वया ज   तं पापं शरीरदापी  नव जेत्
Accumulated sins of a devotee for two births will be certainly washed off from his body, if he proceeds from his home for worshipping Kedareshwar Ling
(in Kashi).
———————————————————————————————————
Kashi is divided into three Khands, Omkar Khand, Vishweshwar Khand and Kedar Khand. It is believed that a person who dies in Kashi attains Mukti. Going a step
further, if the person dies in the area governed by Kedar Khand, he obtains immediate mukti while in other two Khands, there are some sort of hardships to be faced.
On all India basis there are twelve Jyotirlings and there are twelve important Shiv Lings in Kashi which represent the aforesaid twelve Jyotirlings. Kedareshwar
(Varanasi) is worshipped as Kedareshwar Jyotirling (Uttarakhand).
LOCATION OF THE TEMPLE
Kedareshwar temple is located at B-6/102, Kedar Ghat which is a famous locality. It is approachable by cycle rickshaw. Alternatively, people can travel upto a
locality called Sonarpura by Car or Auto rickshaw and travel on foot. People may also travel by boat to Kedar Ghat and walk up the steps directly into the temple.
Please watch our YouTube Video about Triambakeshwar, Kedareshwar and Grishneshwar at following Link
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eLauertky2c&t=24s
TYPES OF POOJAS
https://varanasitemples.in/category/shiva-temples/main-shiva-temples/ 5/13
10/11/2025, 12:23 Main Shiva Temples - Varanasi Temples
The temple is open for worship 03.00 a.m. to 11.00 p.m. Mangala Aarti is performed at 03.15 a.m., 2nd Aarti at 10.00 a.m., 3rd Aarti at 05.30 p.m. and Shayan Aarti
at 10.30 p.m. Timings may change depending upon the season.
Important days are Ekadasi, Pradosham and Poornima days. Anna Abhishek is performed once in a year. In this ritual, the Shiv Ling is covered with cooked rice.
Taking bath in Ganges on every Monday and performing pooja/abhishek of Lord Kedareshwar is very auspicious. Much importance to attached to poojas on
Mondays during Shravan month (July 23 to August 20) and most importantly on last Monday of that month. It is believed that performing Shraaddh ceremony on
Amavasya which falls on Tuesday at Kedar Ghat is very auspicious.
The poojas at the temple are performed by Kumaraswamy Mutt of Tamil Nadu. For doing special pooja etc., it is advisable to consult the Poojari before hand.
POOJARIS OF THE TEMPLE
For performing any pooja at the temple, devotees may contact The Agent, Kumaraswamy Mutt, Kedar Ghat, Varanasi. The telephone number of Kumaraswamy
Mutt is 0542-2454064. E-mail id is agentskmutt@gmail.com.
Kumaraswamy Mutt is a well managed Trust and offers rooms of various types for stay also. Devotees wishing to stay in Varanasi may contact the Agent at the
above address.
KRITHI V ASESHWAR
Lord Shiva was describing the fame of Ratneshwar to Goddess Parvaty and precisely at that time Mahishasur’s son Gajasur was aggressively beating up and killing
various Shiv Gans (attendants / servitors). Wherever his steps touched the ground there were earthquake like tremors. His gigantic hands uprooted all the trees and
his forceful exhalation of breath caused huge tidal waves in the ocean.
Left alone, Gajasur would have created havoc in the world and Lord Shiva did not want any sort of disturbance in the Punya Kshetra : Kashi. When Gajasur
approached him in a speed, Lord Shiva pierced him with his Trishul and lifted him high in the sky. Before dying Gajasur told Lord Shiva that he was extremely
happy that he faced death at the hands of Lord Shiva and this was indeed a bliss in disguise for him. All living beings have to die one day or the other and he prayed
that such kind of death should be a boon to all. He also wished that, after his death, his skin should adorn Lord Shiva for ever and he (Gajasur) would have the
satisfaction of being in constant touch of Lord Shiva.
Lord Shiva agreed accordingly. He further stated that Gajasur had attained his death in the Avimukta Kshetra called Kashi and his body will attain the form of a huge
Shiv Ling precisely at that place. This Ling will be called Kriti Vaseshwar. Krithi Vaseshwar will be a huge/enormous ling, much bigger than any of the Shiv Lings
in Kashi. For the benefit of mankind, Lord Shiva stated that he and his family will always remain in Krithi Vaseshwar Ling.
(KRITHI V ASESHWAR)
All sins committed in previous births and present births are washed away by performing various poojas and good/righteous actions. But a mere darshan of Krithi
Vaseshwar would cleanse the devotee of all his sins. Whatever benefit is derived by reciting seven crore Rudra Jap, will be attained simply by one Rudra Jap (japam)
in front of Krithi Vaseshwar. (Kashi Khand, Chapter sixty eight). Jap or Japam is repeated recitation of a mantra or shloka.
According to Brahma Vaivart Puran, Krithi Vaseshwar makes the life of Kashi Vasis (residents of Kashi who have adopted divine life) fruitful and gives Moksha to
devotees who pray at this temple. According to Koormapuran, whether a devotee attains Moksha even after thousand births or not, with blessings of Krithi
Vaseshwar, the devotee certainly attains moksha and is liberated.
Elsewhere in Kashi Khand, Goddess Parvaty desired to know about the Lingas which are worshipped in Kashi and which are capable of giving mukti. Lord Shiva
told Goddess Parvaty that there are crores of Lingas in Kashi (Kashi Khand, Chapter 73) of which many are Swayambhu Lingas and many have been established by
devotees after observing vedic rituals.
Of the above Lings, there are fourteen prominent Lingas and by merely uttering the names of such Lings, the devotee is absolved of all his sins. Fourth among such
Lings is Krithi Vaseshwar Ling.
——————————————————————————————————-
Kashi Khand, Chapter 68, Shlok 43
सप्तको ट महारुद्रै: सुजप्तैय त्फलं भवेत्
त्फलं लभ्य
त
ते काश्यां पूजना  
  वासास:
Performing Pooja of Krithi Vaaseshwar in Kashi, will yield punya of reciting seven crore Maha Rudrams.
https://varanasitemples.in/category/shiva-temples/main-shiva-temples/ 6/13
10/11/2025, 12:23 Main Shiva Temples - Varanasi Temples
———————————————————————————————————
During medieval times, many Mughal rulers destroyed various temples. Of the important temples of Kashi which were destroyed three were prominent, i.e.
Vishweshwar Temple, Krithi Vaseshwar Temple and Bindu Madhav Temple (Vishnu). Krithi Vaseshwar temple was situated to the north of Kal Bhairav temple and
was destroyed by Aurangzeb. Near the temple was Hans Teerth. People were known to take bath in Hans (Swan) Teerth and pray at Krithi Vaseshwar temple.
After destruction of the temple, the reconstruction was undertaken by Raja Patnimal after a long gap and the present temple was constructed at a place to the South
of the ancient temple and worship is being done at this newly constructed temple now.
One important point needs to be mentioned here. Original Krithi Vaseshwar was in a huge temple premises. As mentioned in the foregoing paragraphs, a mosque
was constructed after destruction of the temple and there was a fountain, precisely at the place where Krithi Vaseshwar Ling existed once. For several centuries,
devotees used to pray at the fountain on Shiv Ratri days, at the spot where the Ling stood once. Several years back, one huge Ling had been installed again on that
spot. It is learnt that the devotees are offering regular prayers at the above spot also.
Special importance is on all Chaturdasi days after Poornima (one day before Amavasya). A person undergoing Vratham on the above day and doing pooja at Krithi
Vaseshwar temple attains highest level of happiness. Kashi Khand lays special importance for pooja/archana during Magha month (Jan. 21 – Feb. 20), Chaturdasi
day after Amavasya (fourteenth day) and Chaitra month (March – April) Poornima days. Performing pooja on such days will be highly beneficial for the devotees.
LOCATION OF THE TEMPLE
Krithi Vaseshwar temple is located at K-46/23, West of Har Tirath Pond, in Mrityunay Mahadev Road. Hans Teerth as mentioned in ancient texts is now known as
Har Tirath and many buildings have now come up where once the pond existed. The temple is approachable from a famous locality called Bishweshwarganj, which is
a great mandi (market place) and travelling to the temple in cycle rickshaw is convenient.
Please watch our YouTube Video about Krithi Vaseshwar at following Link
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OTFgs3keGHo&t=24s
TYPES OF POOJAS
The temple is open from 04.00 a.m. to 01.30 p.m. and from 05.00 p.m. to 10.00 p.m. Mangala Aarti is at 04.00 a.m., aarties are performed at 08.00 am, 12.00 noon,
08.00 p.m. and Shayan Aarti at 10.00 p.m.
For doing special pooja, it is advisable to consult the Poojari before hand.
MRITYUNJAYESHWAR (MRITYUNJAY MAHADEV)
Lord Shiva was describing the various sacred Teerths (Ponds), Koops (Wells) and places of worship in Kashi. Lord Shiva described such places with pleasure (Kashi
Khand, Chapter 97).
In the vicinity of Kaleshwar is the Mrityunjayeshwar. This Ling is capable of keeping untimely death away from devotees. In the vicinity of the Ling is Kalodak
Koop (Well). The water from the well is capable of curing all diseases.
Mrityunjayeshwar is also referred to as Apa Mrityu Hareshwar in Kashi Khand (the Lord who wards off untimely death).
Please watch our YouTube Video about Mrityunjay Mahadev at following Link
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=L6Hr3HZADGg&t=10s
LOCATION OF MRITYUNJAYESHWAR
https://varanasitemples.in/category/shiva-temples/main-shiva-temples/ 7/13
10/11/2025, 12:23 Main Shiva Temples - Varanasi Temples
Mrityunjayeshwar is located at K-52/39, Vriddha Kal, Mrityunjay Mahadev Temple. People can approach this temple by rickshaw through Bisheshwarganj/GPO.
Local devotees call this temple as Mrityunjay Mahadev and the deity is quite famous by that name.
LOCATION OF MRITYUNJAY MAHADEV TEMPLE AS PER GOOGLE MAPS IS GIVEN BELOW
https://www.google.com/maps/place/Mahamrityunjay+Mahadev+Temple/@25.3222648,83.014546,20z/data=!4m12!1m6!3m5!1s0x398e2e3d7dd1fb31:0x15ea53adbe
TYPES OF POOJA
The temple is open from 04.00 a.m. to 12.00 midnight. The doors of the sanctum sanctorum may remain closed at certain times on account of Shringar (Decoration)
etc. There are three aarties at 05.30 a.m. in the morning, 6.30 p.m. and in the night.
As the name implies, Mrityu is death, Jay is victory. Therefore, the combination may be taken as victory over death.
People who are afflicted with fatal planetary combinations in their horoscope, indicating untimely death, perform Maha Mrityunjay Jap at this place and many
devotees have succeeded in their endeavours.
OMKARESHWAR
According to Kashi Khand, Chapter 73, Goddess Parvati wanted to know about Omkareshwar Ling and Lord Shiva narrated as under :
Once Lord Brahma underwent severe penance for several long years and a mighty or very strong force erupted from beneath, piercing the ground, radiating divine
light all over. This assumed the form of a divine Ling and Lord Brahma beheld a divine energy which was representative of all the Vedas (Rig, Yajur and Sam Veda),
the energy which represented Akaar, Ukaar and Makaar. Lord Brahma saw in that divine light, the energy of OM which governs the entire universe.
Lord Brahma visualized a creature with four horns, seven hands, two heads. The Lord also saw a divine energy encompassing all the Vedas, Puranas, five Brahms
(Akaar, Ukaar, Makaar, Naad and Bindu). Lord Brahma was so enchanted with the Panchakshara Ling (Panch+Akshar means five letters mentioned within the
coasts above) that he started singing praises of Lord Shiva whom he could visualize in person, standing in front.
Kashi Khand has described in detail the praises and eulogy which were expressed by Lord Brahma in veneration of Lord Shiva. Very pleased with the prayers of
Lord Brahma, Lord Shiva granted a divine boon to the former. Lord Brahma desired that Lord Shiva should always be present in the Shiv Ling which had appeared
as a Divine energy and the name of the Ling should be Omkareshwar. Lord Shiva granted accordingly and stated that the Shiv Ling was to be called Shiva
Panchayatan, symbolic of Akaar, Ukaar, Makaar, Naad and Bindu.
(OMKARESHWAR)
A devotee who takes a holy dip in Matsyodari Teerth and worships Omkareshwar will not have the fear of rebirth. A person who worships Omkareshwar will derive
the benefits accruing out of performing Ashwa Medha Yagna. According to Kashi Khand, worshipping Omkareshwar is equivalent to reciting one lakh Rudra Japam
and is also equivalent to worshipping all the Shiv Lings in the world. Relevant shlokas from Kashi Khand are given below.
——————————————————————————————————-
Kashi Khand, Chapter 73, Shlok 169
रुद्राणां  नयुतं जप्त्वा यत्फलम् सम्यगाप्य
ते
त
त्फलं लभते नूनं भ ो ार वलोकना
त्
By worshipping Omkareshwar Ling in Kashi, the devotee derives punya benefits of reciting one lakh rudra japam.
———————————————————————————————————
Kashi Khand, Chapter 73, Shlok 171
https://varanasitemples.in/category/shiva-temples/main-shiva-temples/ 8/13
10/11/2025, 12:23 एकम कारमालोक्य सम े  ो 
णमण्डले
 लङ्गजा
ानी सवा  
त
ण दृ ा न स्युन  संशय:
Main Shiva Temples - Varanasi Temples
Worshipping Omkareshwar will give punya of worshipping all groups of Shiv Lings in the world.
———————————————————————————————————
A person who is a devotee of Omkareshwar will attain Mukti even if he dies at any place other than Kashi. Lord Shiva told Lord Brahma that with the radiating
energy of Omkareshwar, Lord Brahma will be successful in his job of creating human beings. After granting all the boons to Lord Brahma, Lord Shiva disappeared
inside the Ling.
Earlier there were five Shiv Lings representing Shiva Panchayatan viz. Akaareshwar, Omkareshwar, Makaareshwar, Naadeshwar and Bindu Ling. Now there are
only three Lings, Akaareshwar, Omkareshwar and Makaareshwar.
Omkareshwar Ling is also known as Kapileshwar and Nadeshwar. Omkareshwar ling was stated to be on the banks of Matsyodari Teerth where, during rainy season,
the rising river Ganges also used to join.
According to Kashi Khand (Chapter 73), on Ashtami and Chaturdasi days, having a bath in Matsyodari Teerth and praying to Lord Omkareshwar, will cleanse the
devotee of all sins. A person praying at Lord Omkareshwar temple is really lucky and will find place in heaven. His ancestors plunge into ecstasy on seeing their
descendent praying at the above temple.
LOCATION OF THE TEMPLE
Omkareshwar temple is located at A-33/23, Pathani Tola, North of Machhodari. Matsyodari Teerth as mentioned in Kashi Khand has dried up now and the locality is
known as Macchodari. The temple is approachable from a famous locality called Machhodari and if a devotee travels through the left of Machhodari, he will come
across Trilochan Police Chowki after which he will take a left turn to reach Omkareshwar.
(AKARESHWAR)
(MAKARESHWAR)
Two other temples Akaareshwar (representing Akaar) are located at A-33/47 and Makaareshwar (representing Makaar) at A-33/25 nearby.
Please watch our YouTube Video about Omkareshwar, Baijnatheshwar and
Bhima Shankar at following Link
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Qlng0C-dJGQ&t=17s
TYPES OF POOJAS
The temple is open for worship from 05.00 a.m. to 11.00 a.m. and from 05.00 p.m. to 09.00 p.m. Aarties are conducted in the morning. Special importance is on
Vaisakha Month which commences some time around April 20, Chaturdasi day after Amavasya (one day before Poornima). Annual Shringar is held on the above day
at Omkareshwar. A person undergoing Vratham (fast) on the above day and doing pooja at Omkareshwar temple attains high level of intellect.
As the importance of Matsoydari Teerth has dwindled (due to drying up of the Teerth), people may perform the abhishek of Omkareshwar Ling with Ganges water.
Recently one Parvaty Devi idol has been installed by Shri Shivkoti Anantapuram (Andhra Pradesh) on 5.5.2010.
https://varanasitemples.in/category/shiva-temples/main-shiva-temples/ 9/13
10/11/2025, 12:23 For doing special pooja, it is advisable to consult the Poojari before hand.
Main Shiva Temples - Varanasi Temples
VRIDHA KALESHWAR
According to Kashi Khand, Chapter 24, there was a staunch devotee known as Vridha Kal. In his earlier birth, he was residing in Holy city of Madurai and was
known as Siva Sharma. He died in Haridwar and reached Vaikunth. Due to his punya karma, he took rebirth and reached Kashi. He was worshipping one Ling and in
due course the Ling was known as Vridha Kaleshwar.
It was believed that Vridha Kal built the temple with the Ling inside but claimed that Lord Mahadev had himself built the temple. Accordingly, even now it is said
that whenever we do some good deed, we should not go on bragging about it. The good deed will be recognized in due course by the appropriate authority and due
rewards will ensue.
——————————————————————————————————-
Kashi Khand, Chapter 24, Shlok 73
दश ना
त् स्पष ना
तस्य पूजना  ु वणान्न
वृद्धकालेश लङ्गस्य सव  प्रा ो त
वा  
ते:
त
म्
By seeing, touching, worshipping, listening to and saluting this Vridha Kaleshwar Linga, all the wordly desires are achieved.
———————————————————————————————————
There was an original temple in a locality called Daranagar which became extinct and another temple was built in a different locality and was named Kaleshwar.
Subsequently, a temple was re-built at the original spot (Daranagar) and to distinguish between the two, the temple in original place is called Vridha Kaleshwar.
(VRIDHA KALESHWAR)
According to Kashi Khand, a person performing pooja and archana at Vridha Kaleshwar is granted all his wishes, he remains absolutely happy and is free from all
sorts of diseases and poverty. Nearby is Kalodak Well, the water from which, will be a cure for all diseases.
——————————————————————————————————-
Kashi Khand, Chapter 24, Shlok 80
वृद्धकालेश्वरे  लङ्गे से व
ते न द रद्रत
ा
नोपसगा  न वा रोगा न पापं नाघजं फलम्
A devotee who worships Vriddh Kaaleshwar Ling will not face poverty, bad reputation, illness and all his sins will be washed away.
———————————————————————————————————
Vridha Kaleshwar also finds mention in Brahma Vaivart Puran and Ling Puran.
Please watch our YouTube Video about Vridha Kaleshwar at following Link
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sNjQ1lbIzmA&t=17s
https://varanasitemples.in/category/shiva-temples/main-shiva-temples/ 10/13
10/11/2025, 12:23 LOCATION OF THE TEMPLE
Main Shiva Temples - Varanasi Temples
Vridha Kaleshwar temple is located at K-52/39, in the premises of Mrityunj Mahadev Temple. The temple is approachable from a famous locality called
Bishweshwarganj, which is a great mandi (market place) and travelling to the temple in cycle rickshaw or auto-rickshaw is convenient.
LOCATION OF MRITYUNJAY MAHADEV TEMPLE AS PER GOOGLE MAPS IS GIVEN BELOW
https://www.google.com/maps/place/Mahamrityunjay+Mahadev+Temple/@25.3222648,83.014546,20z/data=!4m12!1m6!3m5!1s0x398e2e3d7dd1fb31:0x15ea53adbe
TYPES OF POOJAS
The temple is open for worship throughout the day. People can perform pooja and abhishek as per their own convenience. For doing special pooja, it is advisable to
consult the Poojari before hand.
VISHWESHWAR (VISHWANATH TEMPLE)
Vishweshwar Temple also known as Vishwanath Temple is one of the twelve Jyotirlingas. This temple finds mention in various religious texts like Kashi Khand,
Shiv Puran etc. According to Kashi Khand, the name of this temple was Moksh Lakshmi Vilas temple which contained five mandaps of which the main mandap was
Garbha Griha (Sanctum Sanctorum) where the Vishweshwar Ling was worshipped. Vishweshwar Ling is Swayambhu Ling.
Importance of offering flowers to Lord Vishwanath has been described in Kashi Khand in the following shloka.
When Lord Shiva was narrating the greatness, he was accompanied by Lord Indra on one side and seven great rishis were surrounding him. (Kashi Khand, Chapter
99, para 5).” Even today, seven poojaries (believed to be the descendents of the great seven rishis) perform a daily pooja at Vishwanatha Temple at around 7-7.30
p.m., known as Sapta Rishi Pooja/Aarti. As on date devotees can see video clippings of this Aarti at www.shrikashivishwanath.org. However, devotees who visit
Kashi must make it a point to participate in this Holy ritual and it is certain that they will like the Aarti to their utmost satisfaction.
(KASHI VISHWANATH JYOTIRLING)
There are various types of Poojas and rituals prescribed in ancient texts like Kashi Khand, Padma Puran, Linga Puran etc. but considering the present environs it may
not be possible for any person to follow the steps mentioned in the above texts. It is believed that taking a dip in the Holy Ganges at Manikarnika Ghat and having
darshan at Vishwanath Temple will cleanse all sins of a person.
https://varanasitemples.in/category/shiva-temples/main-shiva-temples/ 11/13
10/11/2025, 12:23 Main Shiva Temples - Varanasi Temples
The greatness of Visweshwar (Vishwanath) has been described amply in Kashi Khand in several places in several chapters and if an attempt is made to reproduce the
same here, it may consume much space. However, it is sufficient to say that Vishwanath temple is highly revered and worshipped by several devotees not only from
all over India but all over the world.
Every year on the day after Deepavali Amavasya, 56 Bhog Annakoot Shringar is done at Vishwanath Temple and this attracts devotees from all over the world. It is
believed that having darshan of this beholding sight will prevent shortage of food at our house.
During the past few years, the temple complex has been expanded and new Kashi Vishwanath Corridor has come up. Presently lakhs of devotees are visiting this
holy temple daily.
(NEW KASHI VISHWANATH CORRIDOR)
LOCATION OF THE TEMPLE
The temple is located at Ck-35/19, Chowk, Varanasi. The temple area has been widened to be known as Vishwanath Corridor and the entrance is via Gyanvapi.
Please watch our YouTube Video about Kashi Vishwanath at following Link
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nVskyJmzxGQ&t=13s
TYPES OF POOJAS
The temple is open almost 24 hours with slight gap of about 1-2 hours. The day begins with Mangla Arti at around 2.30 a.m. to 4.00 A.M. Bhog is at 11.30 to 12.30
noon. Sapta Rishi Pooja is carried out at around 7 to 7.30 p.m. daily followed by Shringar at 9.00 p.m. and Shayan pooja at 11.00 p.m. The timings may vary slightly
depending on the seasons (summer/winter).
Special poojas are performed daily at various timings by Nattu Kottai Nagaratthar Chatram (of Tamil Nadu) based in Varanasi. For South Indians visiting Kashi, it is
advisable to stay for at least two days in Nattu Kottai Chattram and participate in the poojas undertaken by them.
POOJARIS OF THE TEMPLE
Since 1983, the management of the temple has been taken over by District Administration. The temple was in a congested premises and recently, a compound wall
has been demolished to give more leg space and elbow room to the devotees. The details of the temple and various poojas being performed are also available in the
temple web site www.shrikashivishwanath.org.
Search This Site
Search
Temple Details
A. Introduction
About Kashi Khand
Kashi Yatra performed by South Indians
SHIV LINGS IN KASHI WORSHIPPED AS JYOTIRLINGS
►Importance of River Ganga
►Aditya Temples
►Bhairav Temples
►Devi Temples
▼Shiva Temples
▼Main Shiva Temples
Atma Veereshwar
Dharmeshwar
Gabhasteeshwar
Kedareshwar
Krithi Vaseshwar
Mrityunjay Mahadev
Omkareshwar
Visweshwar (Vishwanath)
Vridha Kalelshwar
►Other Shiva Temples (A-D)
►Other Shiva Temples (E-K)
►Other Shiva Temples (L-R)
https://varanasitemples.in/category/shiva-temples/main-shiva-temples/ 12/13
10/11/2025, 12:23 ►Other Shiva Temples (S-Y)
►Vinayak Temples
►Vishnu Temples
Importance of immersion of mortal remains (Asthi) in Ganga
Contact Us | About this site | Information & Disclaimers | Privacy Statement | Sitemap
Copyright © 2009 Varanasi-Temples.com - All Rights Reserved.
hri | envs.net
Main Shiva Temples - Varanasi Temples
https://varanasitemples.in/category/shiva-temples/main-shiva-temples/ 13/13
